3
1 The human body produces over fifty different hormones.
(a) Describe what is meant by the term hormone.
(b) The list shows some of the hormones produced by the human body:
A adrenaline
B luteinising hormone
C insulin
D progesterone
E oestrogen
F glucagon.
Complete Table 1.1 by writing the correct letters in each box. Each box can contain one or
more letters and each letter can be used more than once. The first one has been done for
you.
Table 1.1
hormones
produced in the pancreas C and F
produced in the pituitary gland
produced in the ovary
released to increase blood sugar concentration
released to build up the uterus lining after menstruation
[4]
[Total: 7]

4
2 Meerkats are small mammals that live in deserts which are dry and open habitats.
Deserts are very hot during the day but cold at night.
Meerkats are carnivores which search for food during the daytime.
(a) Fig. 2.1 shows part of a food web from a desert.
eagle
beetle
meerkat
animal dung
large snake
scorpion
not to scale
Fig. 2.1
(i) Using the visible characteristics of the organisms in the food web, complete the gaps in
Table 2.1 to classify the named organisms.
Table 2.1
organism vertebrate or arthropod group visible classification feature
scorpion
meerkat mammal
snake
eagle vertebrate bird has feathers
[6]

5
(ii) Suggest and explain what might happen to the populations of snakes and beetles in the
food web if the number of meerkats went down.
(iii) Suggest and explain why deserts usually have low biodiversity.
(b) Meerkats are social animals living in groups of about 10 –15 individuals. When they are not
out in the open, they spend time in networks of burrows, which can be as deep as 1.5 m.
Suggest three ways in which these burrows help the meerkats to survive.
[3]
[Total: 15]

6
3 Fig. 3.1 shows a young tomato plant growing near a window.
Cells from two positions in the stem are also shown.
position X
cell from position X
position Y
light
cell from position Y
Fig. 3.1
The cells at X divide constantly. They then increase in size and some form mature cells like the
one shown from position Y.
(a) Cells at positions X and Y differ in size and shape.
Give two other differences between these cells.
[2]
(b) Explain how the movement of water molecules is involved in this increase in cell size.

7
(c) The tomato plant is responding to the light.
Name this response and explain how auxin and cell elongation are involved.
[5]
(d) The diploid number of chromosomes in a tomato plant cell is 24.
State how many chromosomes a cell from position Y will contain and explain your answer.
[2]
[Total: 12]

8
BLANK PAGE

9
4 Fig. 4.1 shows a label from a snack bar.
Nutrition Facts
One bar: 70 g
mass percentage of recommended
in g daily value
fat 7 11%
dietary fibre 3 12%
sugars 10 –
g
0
protein 30 56%
7
vitamin C 0%
iron 30%
Fig. 4.1
(a) (i) Explain how the nutrition provided by the snack bar is suitable for a person training for a
sporting event.
(ii) Calculate how many grams of dietary fibre are required in the diet to obtain 100% of the
recommended daily value.
(b) Describe what happens to protein in the digestive system.
[Total: 11]

10
5 Myopia is an eye condition. If a person has myopia, near objects can be seen clearly but not those
that are far away.
It can happen when the eyeballs grow slightly too long as shown in Fig. 5.1.
light from far-away object
Fig. 5.1
(a) (i) Explain how parts of the eye are involved in producing a clear image of a near object.
(ii) Suggest why individuals with long eyeballs cannot see far-away objects clearly.
You may draw on the diagram of the eye in Fig. 5.1.
(b) A country carried out two national health surveys separated by approximately 30 years.
Table 5.1 shows the information that was obtained about myopia.
Table 5.1
percentage of people with myopia
males females
age 1971–72 1999–2004 1971–72 1999–2004
12–17 21.7 30.9 26.4 37.0
18–24 22.5 29.7 32.5 46.4
25–34 20.2 38.9 27.8 49.1

11
(i) Comment on how the percentage of people with myopia has changed in this population.
(ii) It is thought that myopia is the result of a combination of genetic and environmental
factors.
It has been suggested that the changing percentages of people with myopia is a result of
changes in human activities.
Suggest a change in human activity and how it could make a person less able to
see far-away objects clearly.
(c) Iris colour is genetically determined. The allele for blue colour, b, is recessive to the allele for
brown colour, B.
Explain why it is not possible to have a heterozygous blue-eyed person.
[Total: 13]

12
6 (a) The human heart pumps blood which circulates around the body in blood vessels.
(i) Name the chamber of the heart with the thickest wall.
(ii) State what causes the sound of the heartbeat.
(iii) Name the blood vessel that carries blood from the aorta to the liver.
(iv) State one function of blood plasma.
(b) Explain the difference between antibodies and antibiotics.
(c) Describe how the process of natural selection has led to the development of strains of
antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
[Total: 12]

13
7 The carbon cycle is fundamental to all ecosystems.
Carbon is continuously cycled between living organisms and the atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 7.1.
atmosphere
living organisms
Fig. 7.1
(a) Describe how carbon is cycled between living organisms and the atmosphere.
(b) Woodland ecosystems are often managed by humans.
If trees in a woodland are chopped down, they can then be:
1. burned
2. removed and made into objects
3. left in the ecosystem.
Compare the effects of these three different forms of management on the woodland
ecosystem itself and more widely on the planet.
[Total:10]

14
BLANK PAGE

15
BLANK PAGE

16
BLANK PAGE
Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every
reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the
publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity.
To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge
Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download
at www.cambridgeinternational.org after the live examination series.
Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of Cambridge Assessment. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge
Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is a department of the University of Cambridge.